notes/compilers/scanner.md, before:

# Scanner

## Lexer / Lexical Analyser / Scanner / Tokeniser

Sometimes also referred to as a scanner. Sometimes scanner is also mentioned as
the initial stage of lexer. A lexer tokenises (breaks the code up into tokens)
the source code.

- A lexer brakes the code up into tokens
- A token is a smallest unit of a program. It can be a delimiter, keyword,
  identifier, arithmetic symbol, etc.
- Scanners are based on recognisers that simulate deterministic finite automata

### Lexical Analysis

#### Finite Automata

It is a computational model that is used to recognise patterns within input
data (input sequence). This is mostly in lexical analysis, text processing and
regular expression matching.

- Finite automaton (aka finite-state machine) is a mathematical model of
  computation that represents a system with a finite number of states, an
  alphabet, a transition function, a start state and one of more accepting
  states. 

## Recogniser

These are programs that identify words in a stream of characters. 

## NFA (Nondeterministic finite automaton)

- Intermediate step from regex to DFA (deterministic finite automaton)
- Uses a set on NFAs one per token type to scan input
- Each regex converted to an NFA
-

Commit message:

docs(compiler): add automaton section

notes/compilers/scanner.md, after:

# Scanner

## Lexer / Lexical Analyser / Scanner / Tokeniser

Sometimes also referred to as a scanner. Sometimes scanner is also mentioned as
the initial stage of lexer. A lexer tokenises (breaks the code up into tokens)
the source code.

- A lexer brakes the code up into tokens
- A token is a smallest unit of a program. It can be a delimiter, keyword,
  identifier, arithmetic symbol, etc.
- Scanners are based on recognisers that simulate deterministic finite automata

### Lexical Analysis

#### Finite Automata

It is a computational model that is used to recognise patterns within input
data (input sequence). This is mostly in lexical analysis, text processing and
regular expression matching.

- Finite automaton (aka finite-state machine) is a mathematical model of
  computation that represents a system with a finite number of states, an
  alphabet, a transition function, a start state and one of more accepting
  states. 

## Recogniser

These are programs that identify words in a stream of characters. 

- **Automaton** - relatively self-operating machine designed to automatically follow a sequence of 
operations or respond to predetermined instructions. The automaton consists of states 
and transitions.

- **Finite Automaton** - an automaton with a finite number of states.

## DFA (Deterministic Finite Automaton)

Used for lexical analysis. DFA reads the input source as a sequence of characters 
and identifies tokens such as keywords, operators, identifiers and literals. This is 
done by recognising patterns. Each state in the DFA represents part of the scanning 
process. Transitions between states are determined by the current input character. 
For each state and input symbol there's exactly one next state. This makes it efficient 
for scanning large source code inputs. 



## NFA (Nondeterministic finite automaton)

- Intermediate step from regex to DFA (deterministic finite automaton)
- Uses a set on NFAs one per token type to scan input
- Each regex converted to an NFA
-
